Name

    EXT_fragment_shader_barycentric

Name Strings

    GL_EXT_fragment_shader_barycentric

Contact

    Pat Brown, NVIDIA (pbrown 'at' nvidia.com)
    Stu Smith, AMD

Contributors

    Ashwin Lele, NVIDIA
    Jeff Bolz, NVIDIA
    Graeme Leese, Broadcom

Status

    Complete

Version

    Last Modified:      June 23, 2021
    Revision:           1

Dependencies

    This extension can be applied to OpenGL GLSL versions 4.50
    (#version 450) and higher.

    This extension can be applied to OpenGL ES ESSL versions 3.20
    (#version 320) and higher.

    This extension is written against the OpenGL Shading Language
    Specification, version 4.60, dated July 23, 2017.

Overview

    This extension provides two new OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL) fragment
    shader built-in inputs (gl_BaryCoordEXT and gl_BaryCoordNoPerspEXT) that are
    three-component vectors specifying the relative weights for each vertex in
    the original primitive.  Fragments located in the corners of a triangle
    primitive will have weights of (1,0,0), (0,1,0), and (0,0,1), while a
    fragment in the exact middle of a triangle will have weights of (1/3, 1/3,
    1/3).  Fragments located at the endpoints of a line primitive will have
    weights of (1,0,0) and (0,1,0).  The weights in the vector gl_BaryCoordEXT
    are perspective-corrected and reflect the location of the fragment as
    projected onto the original primitive.  The weights in the vector
    gl_BaryCoordNoPerspEXT are not perspective-corrected and reflect the
    location of the fragment relative to the on-screen projection of the
    original primitive.  For both vectors, the values of the three components
    should add to approximately 1.0.

    This extension also allows fragment shaders to read the raw per-vertex
    values of shader outputs from the last shader stage executed before
    rasterization.  This mechanism uses the same syntax used to read
    per-vertex inputs in for tessellation and geometry shaders.  The qualifier
    "pervertexEXT" can be applied to fragment shader input blocks and
    variables to specify that those inputs do not read interpolated
    per-fragment values, but instead read raw per-vertex values from the
    vertices of the original primitive.  Like tessellation and geometry shader
    inputs, such variables or blocks must be declared as arrays and indexed
    with a vertex number (0, 1, or 2).  For example, if a shader declares the
    following input block:

      pervertexEXT in Inputs {
        float f;
        float g;
      } inputs[];

    the expression "inputs[0].f" reads the value of <f> for the first vertex
    of the original primitive, while "inputs[2].g" reads the value of <g> for
    the third vertex.

    While barycentric weights can be used to interpolate values by reading the
    outputs of previous shaders (using "pervertexEXT" attributes), it can
    also be used to interpolate values based in input values fetched directly
    from memory, with no shader outputs involved.  For example, in code like
    the following:

      pervertexEXT in int vertexIDs[];
      buffer VertexData {
        struct VertexAttributes {
          vec3 normal;
        } attrs[];
      };

    shaders can fetch the values of <normal> for the three vertices of a
    triangle primitive using:

      vec3 normal0 = attrs[vertexIDs[0]];
      vec3 normal1 = attrs[vertexIDs[1]];
      vec3 normal2 = attrs[vertexIDs[2]];

    without reading or emitting any normal vectors in a vertex shader.

    Mapping to SPIR-V
    -----------------

    For informational purposes (non-normative), the following is an
    expected way for an implementation to map GLSL constructs to SPIR-V
    constructs:

      pervertexEXT auxiliary storage qualifier -> PerVertexKHR Decoration

      gl_BaryCoordEXT -> BaryCoordKHR decorated OpVariable
      gl_BaryCoordNoPerspEXT -> BaryCoordNoPerspKHR decorated OpVariable

    Input variables decorated with "PerVertexKHR" are accessed with an extra
    array dimension identifying a vertex number.


Modifications to the OpenGL Shading Language Specification, Version 4.60

    Including the following line in a shader can be used to control the
    language features described in this extension:

      #extension GL_EXT_fragment_shader_barycentric : <behavior>

    where <behavior> is as specified in section 3.3.

    New preprocessor #defines are added to the OpenGL Shading Language:

      #define GL_EXT_fragment_shader_barycentric         1


    Modify Section 3.6, Keywords (p. 15)

    (add to list of keywords, on the line with "centroid", "flat", "smooth",
     and "noperspective")

      pervertexEXT


    Modify Section 4.3, Storage Qualifiers (p. 41)

    (add to table of auxiliary storage qualifiers, p. 42)

    Auxiliary Storage
       Qualifier          Meaning
    ------------------    ------------------------------------------
     pervertexEXT         no interpolation; fragment shader reads
                          previous-stage outputs with a vertex number


    Modify Section 4.3.4, Input Variables (p. 45)

    (modify third paragraph, p. 46, to document that fragment shader inputs
     declared with "pervertexEXT" are treated similarly to tessellation and
     geometry shader inputs and document that "pervertexEXT" has no effect in
     non-fragment shaders)

    Tessellation control input variables, tessellation evaluation input
    variables, geometry shader input variables, and fragment shader input
    variables qualified with "pervertexEXT" get the per-vertex values written
    out by output variables of the same names in the previous active shader
    stage. Since all of these inputs have separate values for each vertex
    in the input primitive, each such input variable (or input block, see
    interface blocks below) needs to be declared as an array. For tessellation
    or geometry stage inputs, centroid, and interpolation qualifiers
    are allowed, but have no effect. For example,

      in float foo[]; // geometry shader input for vertex "out float foo"

    (modify fourth paragraph, p. 46, to document how the array size for
     "arrayed" inputs is obtained for tessellation shaders and per-vertex
     fragment shader inputs)

    ...   For geometry shaders, ... section 4.4.1 "Input Layout Qualifiers".
    For tessellation control and evaluation shaders, the array size will be
    set by (or if provided, must be consistent with) the maximum patch size
    gl_MaxPatchVertices.  For fragment shader inputs qualified with
    "pervertexEXT", the array size will be set to (or if provided, must be
    no more than) three.

    (modify fifth paragraph, p. 46, to treat "pervertexEXT" inputs as
     "arrayed" interfaces)

    Some inputs and outputs are arrayed ...  Geometry shader inputs,
    tessellation control shader inputs and outputs, tessellation evaluation
    inputs, and fragment shader inputs qualified with "pervertexEXT" all have
    an additional level of arrayness relative to other shader inputs and
    outputs.  Component limits...

    (modify second paragraph, p. 47, adding alternate language about the
     handling of fragment shader inputs using "pervertexEXT")

    Fragment shader inputs not declared with "pervertexEXT" get
    per-fragment values, typically interpolated from a previous stage's
    outputs. ... as well as the interpolation qualifiers flat, noperspective,
    and smooth.  Fragment shader inputs declared with "pervertexEXT" are
    not interpolated.  Such inputs are arrayed and may be used to directly
    access the previous stage's outputs for one of the vertices of the
    primitives producing the fragment, using a vertex number of 0, 1, or 2 as
    an index.  ...

    (modify third paragraph, p. 47, allowing integer and double-precision
     fragment shader inputs if qualified with "pervertexEXT")

    Fragment shader inputs that are, or contain, signed or unsigned integers,
    integer vectors, or any double-precision floating-point type must be
    qualified with the qualifier "flat" or "pervertexEXT".

    (modify the fourth paragraph, p. 48, adding an example)

    Fragment inputs are declared as in the following examples:

      ...
      pervertexEXT in vec4 perVertexAttr[];


    Modify Section 4.3.9, Interface Blocks, p. 51

    (update the fake grammar, p. 52, to clarify that you can use the
     interpolation qualifier "pervertexEXT" on input blocks)

      interface-qualifier:
        ...
        pervertexEXT in
        ...


    Modify Section 4.5, Interpolation Qualifiers, p. 83

    (add to the table in first paragraph of the section)

      Qualifier         Meaning
      ----------------  --------------------------------------------
      pervertexEXT       no interpolation, values accessed per vertex

    (add before the next-to-last paragraph, p. 83)

    A variable or interface block qualified with "pervertexEXT" must be
    declared as an array, where each array element corresponds to one of the
    vertices of the primitive that produced the fragment.  This array will
    have a size of three if declared as unsized, and reads of per-vertex
    values for missing vertices, such as the third vertex of a line primitive,
    will return values from the valid vertex with the highest
    index. The order of the vertices of the input primitive is
    defined in the OpenGL or Vulkan API Specifications.  No interpolated
    per-fragment values are available for inputs qualified with
    "pervertexEXT".  For variables qualified with "pervertexEXT", it is a
    compile-time error to also qualify the variable with either "centroid" or
    "sample".


    Modify Section 4.5.1, Redeclaring Built-In Interpolation Variables in the
    Compatibility Profile, p. 84

    (modify the first paragraph of the section to prohibit the use of
     "pervertexEXT" on built-ins)

     The following predeclared variables can be redeclared with an
     interpolation qualifier other than "pervertexEXT" when using the
     compatibility profile:
     ...


    Modify Section 7.1, Built-In Language Variables, p. 122

    (modify the list of fragment built-ins, p. 124)

    In the fragment, language, built-in variables are intrinsically declared
    as:

      ...
      in vec3 gl_BaryCoordEXT;
      in vec3 gl_BaryCoordNoPerspEXT;

    (add description of the new built-ins to the list of descriptions, before
     gl_PerVertex, p. 131)

    The built-in fragment shader input variables gl_BaryCoordEXT and
    gl_BaryCoordNoPerspEXT are three-component vectors providing barycentric
    coordinates for the fragment.  The values for these built-ins are derived
    as described in the OpenGL or Vulkan API Specifications.


Issues
    (1) What are the differences to NV_fragment_shader_barycentric?
    
    Reads of missing per-vertex values return values from the
    valid vertex with the highest index.



Revision History

    Revision 1
    - Internal revisions.
